Thank you, friends. Thank you, friends, Dharma sisters, brothers. Thank you so much. What
a special opportunity. Once again, we have the fortune to be together in this way virtually
or in person to really contemplate and connect to the living Dharma, the nature of reality,
the nature of ourselves, so kind of bringing that up actively, vividly in my own mind and
in our minds, like this deep joy and appreciation. Always, this is like for me to get to kind
of say something about Dharma, it's like almost is just kind of sometimes excruciatingly
embarrassing.
It's like I'm really nervous. It's just such a big responsibility. And to just reflect
on this vast and profound teachings of the Buddha and the Guru Rinpoche and all these
masters. So we know, like, there will be good if we just kind of pause to reflect on what
they said, even if we just repeat the words of the Buddha, repeat the words of Guru Rinpoche
of these masters, these living lineage masters, and then there's such great immense benefit.
So then we're kind of doing that. And then for me personally, it's like really humbling
and I think, how can I like be receptive to this? And then I really think of how Venerable
Kemper Rinpoche always points us to this. And so did Venerable Kenshin Pauld and Cher
Rinpoche and all these lineage masters, these three qualities that we should actively kind
of ignite in our own minds whenever we're going to study or practice the Dharma. These
three qualities we've heard so many times, renunciation, bodhicitta, and pure perception.
Especially in the context of coming together to practice and contemplate the nundra or
the foundational teachings in this Vajrayana view and these teachings taught by the Buddha
and Guru Rinpoche. So always we should have these three frameworks as a living experiences
in our mind as much as we can. If not just during this brief window, we're trying to
really reignite them, vividly have them kind of saturate our mind stream, like come to
life as a living presence, this renunciation, bodhicitta and pure perception. So renunciation
can be joy and appreciation, this deep gratitude for the Dharma, for the causes for happiness,
happiness to remove the causes of suffering, this deep joy and appreciation that we have
this path that was taught to us. We have all these things in our favor to actually take
steps on this path and get the freedom, the fruit of this path, become free forever for
the benefit of all beings. Then bodhicitta, all beings are kind of in this same boat,
all sentient beings. We don't want to hurt. We don't want to have pain. We don't want
to suffer. Just like me, I don't want to suffer. All beings, we have this same situation. So
what can I do to help? Even if it's just a little bit, what can I do to not hurt someone
to help them? So really reactivate this bodhicitta, this big vast commitment, kind of activating
the illusory kind of absolute nature of experience of appearance in our minds. And also with
that like to really kind of connect to the detailed, the living embodiment and relationality
of beings, like what can I do right now in this context, in this situation that I'm in?
What can I do to better serve beings, to help them connect to their own nature, to help
my own nature to more brightly shine out? So really bring this bodhicitta to mind as
a living kind of living experience right now. And pure perception, begin by seeing the goodness
in oneself, seeing the goodness in others. Kind of this big open view that kind of doesn't
hold so strongly onto forms and sounds and kind of movements of mind, emotions and thoughts.
Kind of a much more kind of open, like in a way playful, kind of light touch kind of
experience of what's happening right now. To connect to this goodness, this kind of
sizzling quality of this bodhicitta in my heart and other beings' hearts. To like kind
of really see this nature first and have this nature kind of like fill our vision and illuminate
to bring to light kind of this, have this glowing nature of bodhicitta really kind of
be part of our living experience. That this is actually kind of the mandala or the world
that we're in now. There's this beautiful Buddha nature shining in all directions, outside,
inside, up, down, all the ten directions everywhere. So try to just to become receptive vessels
of the dharma and just that means actually to become a living presence of dharma. We
activate this together, renunciation, bodhicitta, pure perception for a moment.
Thank you. So kind of the topic for today which is just we have a little short time to reflect
on the dharma together then we'll go into the complete dujum tersar nundra practice.
The kind of topping today is more of like an inquiry. This is like kind of really open
question for myself and just for you too if you want. The question is where do I want
to go deep? Where do I want to go deep? So that's kind of the question. So the opening
of space you get to be in together. There's so many things we can explore in life. The
time is just passing. Really yesterday's gone. Earlier today's gone. Things really more and
more quickly seem like they're just becoming these memories and yet we have this whole
vast world outside and inside that we can explore. There's so many amazing things that
we can put our time and energy into. There's also so much of this kind of distraction.
So that's a real question especially for Buddhist practitioner. Where do I want to go deep?
And it's a real question in the sense of we have to answer this for ourselves and we have
to keep asking ourselves this question and keep answering this question and we do that
every single moment whether we're aware of it or not because we keep choosing what we're
doing with our mind. We keep placing our mind somewhere. We keep filling our days with activities.
We're choosing where we want to go deep every day. Whatever habits we cultivate that's where
we're going deep. This is the habit we're growing. So it's kind of in one way. It's
an unavoidable question. What do I want to focus on? What do I want to get really good
at? What do I want to fill my time with? Where do I want to place my energy? What am I going
to spend my wealth on? Where am I going to have my Buddha nature really be present with?
Because every moment we're really answering that question for ourselves by what we do
with our mind and what we do with our speech and what we do with our bodies. And I say
that as a real question for myself. What am I cultivating? What am I opening into? What
am I closing away from? What am I exploring? What am I growing? And so this is just a kind
of big opening question because now it's information age and it's always been, you know, there's
always been so many things we can explore. And to get really good at something and to
really go deep, to get some real nuance and flexibility with something, to really grow
a skill, to really deepen a relationship, to deepen trust, to really kind of enrich
connection. All these things take time. We keep having to choose them to really get good
at Dharma, to really have our, you know, going for refuge, to really have that become stable,
to really have bodhicitta beyond more of the time, to really see everything as an offering
we're making to the three jewels, to really actively take on experience as a purification,
to really keep connecting to the living lineage blessings of the enlightened beings here and
everywhere, to keep dedicating the merit so that I can be more effective, so that my bodhicitta
can be more bright, more stable. All these take time. This is just the nundra. And these
are just qualities of being a really a bodhisattva on the path. These are all choices we have
to keep making, and no one can make them for us. No one can make our mind do anything.
We have to keep putting our attention where we want to actually grow and go deep. This
is really up to each of us. So as a bodhis, this is kind of a big opportunity because
really for like really healthy bodhis, and according like following the teachings of
the Buddha, this is 100% in our power and our control. What am I doing with my mind
right now? This is 100% up to me. How is my heart now? This is 100% up to me. So Buddhism
has responsibility right at the just the beating center of the whole path of Buddhism. No matter
what's happening outside, good things and bad things, gain and loss, praise and blame,
all these things like I still comes down to my decision of what am I going to do in response?
What am I doing with this moment now? Because we can't get good at everything. We can't
learn everything. There's always going to be more to know. There's always going to be
more to do. It really literally is endless. So that question of what am I where am I going
to go deep? It's a very real question. It's definitely active for me because when I choose
to go somewhere deep, that's actually pretty shallow. It doesn't make me feel really good.
It doesn't really help much. Then that taste in my mouth is it gets, it's not very pleasant.
But then I'm overcome with all these bad habits, laziness, distraction, complaining. Why me?
I want vacation. All these, you know, basically trying to avoid actually dealing with the
present moment. There's so many ways to avoid that and just say, put the blame somewhere
else. If only something, something was changed, then I would really, wow, then my, I would
really practice. Then my path would really open up. But this is really not way of Buddhism
it should be because it's some sorrow. It's never going to be perfect. There's always
going to be something wrong. Pervasive, the pervasive quality of conditioned existence
of conditioned grasping mind, duality mind is suffering dissatisfaction. This is always
going to be a part of duality mind. This is never going to be all right. When we stay
in the realm of duality mind, it's just not that's kind of effect. So in terms of this
topic, kind of the interesting way this is open for me just today, this is like kind
of thinking, Oh, I should, I really want to look at his only doodramache. He has big commentary
on the didgerim chairs are none grow, torture lighting the way to freedom, complete instructions
on the preliminary practices. So this is a gold is like really invaluable. This commentary
by his Holiness is so precious. And then I'd really thought with this question, because
it was more actively in my mind, where do I want to go deep? Because time is going.
And whether I really develop a capacity or not, it's really the opportunity is shrinking
each day. I have to choose, I have to consciously make this choice, what I'm going to put my
time and energy to, because the opportunity is escaping every day, impermanence, right?
So I thought in this book, I should really look at this book. So I turned on the back.
And there's a beautiful quote on the back. And I read it, and I was like, Oh, this is
so beautiful. So at the very least, can read a quote of his Holiness doodramache, and this
will be a big benefit. And no matter what else I say right now, and then we'll practice
the nundra together, that's really a big benefit. So that makes this time together meaningful,
even if nothing else is meaningful during this time. And then to have heard the words,
the Vadra speech of someone like his Holiness doodramache is exquisitely important. It's
so special. So this is just from the back of this book. Okay, so it's all in the context
of where do I want to go deep? So as Holiness doodramache says, unless we have faith, however
many other good qualities we might have, they will not be of much use to us, as though we
were very beautiful but blind. So we have to make an effort to develop faith by meditating
on impermanence four times a day, by reflecting minutely on actions and their effects, by
reflecting
on the positive aspects of everything, by reflecting on how rare the Dharma is, by thinking
of our teachers kindness, by thinking of our spiritual brothers and sisters with pure perception,
and by thinking of the excellent qualities of the Buddha. It is important to consider
that other people are, all of them, marvelous, and to be free of partiality and notions of
high or low status, thus making a habit of faith and taming your own mind. So in terms
of this question, where do I want to go deep? That's a Buddhist. This is really just such
a treasure. It's really saying not only where I could go deep, but how I could go deep,
how to get there. So then I thought, read this quote, and then I was looking a little
more in this book. I was like, really? Where can I go into this question? And so then I
randomly flipped through the book this morning, and I randomly flipping, and I just opened
the book, and I opened to this same quote. This is truly random in the sense of trying
to do this, okay? Cause and condition random, huh? So page 154, I'm going to read the same
quote because this is literally of this whole big book, 350 or so page book, then I opened
and it's the same quote. So I want to read this quote again, because at least for me,
then I need this quote. This is really kind of something that I need to put more time
into to go deep with, okay? So here's the same exact quote, "Unless we have faith, however
many other good qualities we might have, they will not be of much use to us, as though we
were very beautiful but blind. So we have to make an effort to develop faith by meditating
on impermanence four times a day, by reflecting minutely on actions and their effects, by
reflecting
on the positive aspects of everything, by reflecting on how rare the Dharma is, by thinking
of our teacher's kindness, by thinking of our spiritual brothers and sisters with pure
perception, and by thinking of the excellent qualities of the Buddha. It is important to
consider that other people are, all of them, marvelous, and to be free of partiality and
notions of high or low status, thus making a habit of faith and taming your own mind."
Then it goes on to say, "The omniscient Dharma Lord said," this is Longchampa, "Unless you
do all you can to develop faith, you will never attain perfection, but will wonder constantly
in cyclic existence. Therefore, whomever you are following, make every effort to cultivate
faith." So for me, part of the answer to this question of where do I want to go deep, it
really has to involve faith. So we can open this a little more together, but on this next
page in the same book, page 155, there's a section, the next section, "The Causes and
Conditions That Make Faith Grow or Decrease." And so here I'll read this, "C causes that
make faith grow." How can we increase our faith and devotion? By sincerely following
a sublime being, a qualified teacher. By relying on special companions who have blended their
minds with the teachings. By studying the profound sutras and tantras. By reflecting
undistractedly on death. By reading or listening to stories that illustrate the law of cause
and effect. And by doing longer sessions than before of meditation and practice on the profound
teachings. So these are a few of the conditions that will make faith grow. And then I'll go
back to page 153, the same section on faith, on categories of faith. The essence of faith,
this is again his Holiness, his words. "The essence of faith is a clear, untroubled mind,
aware of what should be adopted and what should be avoided." So again, the essence of faith
is a clear, untroubled mind, aware of what should be adopted and what should be avoided.
And for this, there are three categories of faith. Vivid faith, eager faith, and confident
faith. Vivid faith, this is the clear, fresh state brought about by the feeling of joy
and devotion untainted by guile that results from seeing or hearing of the wondrous qualities
of sublime beings. It is like the water purifying gem that renders turbid water limpid and
it clears away all negative thoughts. Then eager faith, with this kind of faith, one
yearns to be rid of the suffering of cyclic existence. One yearns to attain liberation
and enlightenment. And to those two ends, one is eager to give up what is wrong and
adopt what is right. Eager faith induces us to devote ourselves to the sublime Dharma
in much the same way that desire for wealth is what makes people pursue riches.
Then thirdly, confident faith. Confident faith implies confidence that cyclic existence and
its causes are to be eliminated. Confidence that nirvana and its causes are to be adopted.
And confidence that indeterminate states are pointless. Just as confidence in the future
harvest induces a farmer to till the soil, confidence that the sublime Dharma will never
fail us gives us the necessary conviction to practice without doubting and hesitating.
I'll read the final line again. Confidence that the sublime Dharma will never fail us
gives us the necessary conviction to practice without doubting and hesitating.
So where do I want to go deep? For me, I mean, really, if I could get to the point where
I had confidence that the sublime Dharma would never fail me, which would lead to the necessary
conviction to practice without doubting and hesitating, then I want to go deep there.
That the Dharma is unfailing. That kind of vivid, eager, confident faith, the Dharma's
unfailing can clearly, in my mind, clearly know what to adopt, clearly know what to avoid,
and to eagerly choose what to adopt. Happiness and the causes of happiness are here, nirvana
and the causes of attaining nirvana, and eliminating suffering and the causes of suffering. So
eliminating being trapped in endless samsara by actually removing, doing the work, really
the work of not planting more seeds of suffering, and truly choosing that.
And so for Buddhists, this is really comes down to, it is a question of faith, but defined
in this way. This is very clearly not a blind faith. It's a very clear definition of faith.
And for Buddhists, this is kind of what we need to have. Where do I want to go deep?
We really do need this faith. And then how do we get this faith? I mean, this is so clear.
To really look at suffering, to really investigate what is the cause of this suffering? Is it
possible to stop this suffering? If it's possible to actually pursue the path, the treatment?
To actually grow, to deepen what stops suffering? This is very scientific.
So I don't know, this is an open inquiry. There's not some big final point I'm trying to get
to here. Time is really running out. We have such a good support right now. This body, the
living dharma, is living teachers. We can do anything we want to do with our mind. We can
choose to grow and deepen whatever we want to grow and deepen. And we know how to. Even
just what I was reading here today, that's enough to know. That's a full path. Just in
these few little quotes, kind of randomly pulled out of this big book, this treasure
trove of teachings, this is all that we need. So how much time do I want to waste dabbling
in this and that? That's a really personal question. Because if I'm drowning in samsara,
I can wish upon a star to save all beings, but I can't really help much.
And I should aspire to save all beings. I should aspire until every single being is
free from suffering that I will remain to do whatever it takes to protect them, to care
for them, to love them, to nourish them, to defend them. In whatever way is actually helpful.
Like to have that level of bodhisattva vision. It has to actually be helpful, which means I
really have to tune into what is helpful. And that's very context dependent. I really have
to show up and tune into the situation. Not the way I want it to be, but the way it is,
what's going on with someone else, what's actually available in the situation.
I really have to develop these abilities to be able to do that. It takes a lot of,
there's a lot of deepening in that process, but really to get, to have that beast, you know,
kind of like deep enough to really have that dream come true for all beings to be free of suffering
.
I definitely have to get more free myself. There's no question. And we know this path.
We know how. And that's really why at Nundra, the foundational practices, this is in one way. It's
like a lot of different ways to list the four common Nundros, you know, how to turn the mind
towards the Dharma, how to turn the mind away from samsara, presciences of human embodiment,
impermanence, causes and conditions and effects, the suffering of conditioned mind or cyclic
existence. We really have to, this has to be like permeating our, our being, our mind state
all the time. That's the path. And this is the foundation of every Nundra session of every kind
of as a Dharma person from the ground up from Theravada into Sutra mayana into tantra mayana
into Zogchen and these higher level teachings. They all have this bedrock. The four thoughts
that turn the mind towards the Dharma. And if we really turn our mind towards the Dharma,
this is kind of the definition of faith. Once we really turns our mind towards the Dharma,
these four points, that is faith. Because we're just clearly seeing how reality functions,
how cause and effect functions, what leads to happiness, what leads to suffering,
the precious opportunity we have to actually take steps on this path to freedom.
So that's kind of it. There's a million ways that the world is on fire.
The generate age, and it's just some suffering, suffering, cyclic existence, it's always going
to be breaking. It's just how it is. And I say that with like a tenderness of heart. This is,
I'm so sad. This is always how it's going to be. But if I just constantly am thinking about what's
wrong, what's broken, this is broken, that's bad, this big thing, how to do this. And I don't
actually put in the time and energy to deepen my own experience of bodhicitta, my own experience
of freedom by actually planting the seeds for the causes of happiness and removing the distortions,
the distractions that cause suffering, then I'm just kind of fooling myself. I'm really wasting
time.
It's just like an entertainment, doom scrolling, you know. Oh, this, it's like seeing more ways
that samsara is suffering. Oh, this is, it's still suffering today. The samsara is still suffering,
but not actually doing anything about it. Just kind of like, it's like, oh, suffering still,
more suffering. See this, honey, there's more suffering today. Who wants to hear the list of
suffering? Not if you're, if you're really not going to do anything about the second noble truth,
third noble truth, fourth noble truth. What are the causes of suffering? Can they be removed and
removing them? Just listing suffering is what does it really do to help anything?
So in our own abilities to like actually really clearly see with discernment and with curiosity
and with compassion and love and tenderness and really open-mindedness, how this suffering is
working. And then personally, like with my own mind, what I'm choosing to engage in with my
awareness
right now to connect to this bodhicitta. So like we said in the beginning, renunciation,
bodhicitta, pure perception. These are three ways that no matter what we're experiencing,
no matter what's happening around us, these will hold us on the path. They'll brighten our faith.
They'll help us keep going deeper into something that's endlessly deep, the dharma. They'll help
us grow the conviction that the dharma really is unfailing because it's just talking about how
cause and effect works. And then we have a bigger span of what we talk about when we mean cause and
effect. Bigger and bigger, wider and wider. So this is just about becoming more and more inclusive,
having more of the nature be on our radar, being more tuned into more interdependence.
That's what the path of dharma leads to. And that's where freedom is, to be completely
perfectly in tune with interdependence. That's called freedom or enlightenment.
So I pray for myself, really, where do I want to go deep? I really want that. I want to go deep to
have this unfailing conviction that dharma will never fail. And then to take that resolve and to
put this time, this moment, this moment of mine again and again and again, to line it up with dh
arma,
to turn my mind towards the dharma, to open my heart towards dharma, to put time on the cushion,
to have that goodness be present in my mind, my interactions, my relationships,
to really keep with really enthusiastic joy, keep turning my mind towards the dharma until it
really
saturates my being all the time. That's really a prayer I have for myself, for all beings. We
can really be free in that way. By tuning into interdependence, by tuning into our own goodness
nature, by seeing that in others, and by really actively doing that again and again, that's called
the path. So that's kind of a little bit of an inquiry into where to go deep. And that's just,
there's all these different ways to answer that. And we each have full responsibility and power to
answer that for ourselves. And we keep answering it every single moment with what we do with our
mind and our speech and our body. So that's kind of a brief little reflection. And then we'll go
into this, "Dhudjima, here's our nundra practice."